Let me set the scene for you.
It's late in the afternoon, July 6th,
2019.
Jeffrey Epstein is flying back from
Paris.
He's on his private plane.
He's about to land at Teterboro Airport
in New Jersey.
Which is a small airport that's often
used by wealthy people in New York for
their private jets.
He's making plans including heading to
his private island in the Caribbean.
>> [music]
>> Eventually his plane lands.
A couple of customs [music] agents come
on board the plane to check his
passport.
The way they usually do with private
planes.
>> [music]
>> And then they ask him to come to the
terminal.
And he follows them.
>> [music]
>> When he gets to the terminal,
there's an FBI agent
and an NYPD detective waiting [music]
for him.
And they tell him that he's under
arrest.
>> [music]
>> Epstein appears shocked by this.
And [music]
in the car on the way to Manhattan with
the agents,
he asks them two questions.
One is,
is this sex trafficking?
And the other is,
is this about underage?
Epstein's [music] taken that night to
the Metropolitan Correctional Center.
The big federal jail in lower Manhattan.
The MCC. [music]
And he's only been there for a matter of
hours when one of the jail employees
notices him.
And sees this guy who seems distraught
and sad
and a little confused.
>> [music]
>> She's concerned enough that she sits
down and writes an email to the jail
staff.
And she says she thinks somebody from
the psychology department should come
and talk to him, quote,
"Just to be on the safe side.
>> [music]
>> And prevent any suicidal thoughts.
>> From The New York Times, I'm Michael
Barbaro.
This is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> Today,
the untold story of Jeffrey Epstein's
final
>> [music]
>> weeks, days, and hours inside a
Manhattan jail.
My colleague, [music] Charles Homans,
takes us inside a major new
investigation [music]
by the Times
that tries to answer the question that
refuses to go away. [music]
Did the world's most powerful and
well-connected [music] sex offender
die by his own hand
or by somebody [music] else's?
It's Thursday, June 18th.
Charlie, why at this stage in the
Jeffrey Epstein story, 7 years after his
death,
when
all eyes are on
his network of friends and his enablers,
his victims, all the politics
around the release of
the Epstein files,
why did you all undertake this
inquiry into his death right now?
>> You know, suspicions around Epstein's
death have really been incredibly
persistent from literally, you know, the
hour that the story broke back in 2019.
People have been very suspicious of the
official story, which from the beginning
was that he died by suicide in his jail
cell. And there's just a lot about the
story that has not sat well with people
ever since. And it's one of the very
unique
paranoid elements in American politics
that really feels like it crosses pretty
much all political boundaries. I mean,
I've certainly met conservatives and
liberals and Trump supporters and Trump
haters who all think that Jeffrey
Epstein did not kill himself.
>> Right. It's a bipartisan view that
hasn't really dimmed.
>> Right. I mean, this has been amplified
online by literally everyone from Donald
Trump to Hunter Biden at one point or
another.
>> As somebody who has written a lot about
conspiratorial thinking in American
life, I'm curious what you yourself
think of that viewpoint.
>> I think that I shared a pretty common
skepticism about the official story of
Epstein's death going into this
reporting. There was just a lot about it
that seemed instinctively very strange.
There was this huge sort of cascade of
mistakes and technical failures and just
kind of weird mysteries around his death
that was hard to I think take at face
value for a lot of people.
>> Mhm.
>> And the suspicion around this case was
really inflamed by the release of the
Epstein files.
There are thousands of pages in the
files relating to this series of federal
investigations into Epstein's death.
There was one that immediately followed
by the FBI
and federal prosecutors. And then there
was one by the Office of the Inspector
General of the Justice Department that
went on for years after this.
And a lot of the raw materials of those
investigations are in the Epstein files.
>> Mhm.
>> So, my colleagues and I, Steve Eder, Jan
Ransom, Michael Rothfeld, we dove into
these papers a couple months ago and
just started digging and seeing what was
there. So many of these files, there's
just so many of them that even some of
the stuff that's been out
in the public eye has not actually
really been fully picked through.
>> Mhm.
>> And we were able to take advantage of
the experience of some of the people on
this project who really know the Epstein
story forwards and backwards and who
were able to make connections inside of
these files and figure out who some of
the people were who we were reading
about in some of these redacted
documents. So, we used these documents
as a road map to do our own
investigation, interviewing anybody we
could find, gathering any other
documents we could find, and trying to
construct in as much detail as we could
Jeffrey Epstein's last days in this
jail,
the moments leading up to his death, and
the biggest question of all, how did he
die?
Did he die by suicide or did something
else happen?
>> [gasps]
>> And we found that all the evidence that
we gathered really did point towards one
conclusion.
>> Well, we're going to get to that
conclusion, but I want to do it by
having you reconstruct
the story you all found in your
reporting, and let's
for the purposes of our storytelling
here, pick up with what happens after
this employee clocks Epstein's
despondency, his distraughtness, as he's
coming in.
>> So, within hours of arriving,
>> [music]
>> Epstein has his first real rough
encounter in this jail.
>> [music]
>> The inmates have very quickly figured
out who he is.
And a guy who calls himself Locotron,
which is Dominican slang [music] for
like a crazy person, comes up to him
with a t-shirt pulled up over his face
and shakes him down for money.
It's this very quick interaction, but
it's something that clearly really
rattles Epstein. If you think about
this, like only hours before [music] he
is, you know, in his own private jet
crossing the Atlantic, and suddenly he's
in this fairly notorious jail being
shaken down in the sort [music] of
protection scheme. It's an incredible
reversal of fortune. It's almost hard to
imagine. [music]
So, by the next day, the jail warden
figured out who Epstein is, and they
decide that he can't be in general
population. There's too much risk there,
clearly.
And they put him in the special housing
unit that they call the SHU.
The special housing unit is a sort of
solitary confinement wing
of the MCC.
It is a very isolated place. The inmates
are stuck in their cells 23 hours a day
and it's used to house people for a
number of reasons,
but this includes some of the you know
people accused of very very serious
crimes
and violent crimes.
So, Epstein is led into his new cell and
he's introduced to his cellmate, who's
this guy named Nicholas Tartaglione.
And the door closes behind him.
Epstein asks Tartaglione what he's in
for and Tartaglione replies multiple
homicides.
>> Wow.
>> And at this point Epstein turns around
and starts banging on the door and
demands to be let out of the cell.
>> He's basically saying get me the hell
out of this right cell. I don't want to
be the next person killed by this
alleged multi-killer.
>> Exactly. But the fact that Epstein was
put with Tartaglione reflects the sort
of counter-intuitive prison warden
logic, which is that people who have
been accused of very serious violent
crimes on the outside while they're
awaiting trial are actually very
unlikely to commit further violent
crimes. But somebody like Tartaglione,
who's facing the death penalty at this
point, has every incentive, you know,
not [snorts] to kill somebody like
Jeffrey Epstein in prison.
>> His incentives are to be in this logic
as good to Epstein as possible so that
at sentencing
>> The theory is that if he behaves well
while he's awaiting trial, that could be
factored into his sentencing and he
could avoid the death penalty. But for
the wardens in this situation, the goal
is not just to find a cellmate who's not
going to kill Epstein. The goal is to
find a cellmate who is going to keep
Epstein from hurting himself.
From the time they kind of realize who
they've got on their hands here, this is
a question that they're asking. You
know, because of the
nature of the charges that he's facing,
there's sort of an automatic assessment
for suicide risk that kicks in early on
in his time in jail.
And
the prison psychologist who assesses him
comes away from those early
conversations feeling like actually his
risk is not that great. He's he seems
pretty upbeat. He seems optimistic that
he's going to get bail. It feels like
he's confident about being able to fight
the charges against him.
>> Okay, so what happens next?
>> In mid-July, Epstein finds out that he's
been denied bail.
And he's going to have to stay in this
jail until he goes to trial.
>> Which could be quite a long time.
>> Which could be quite a long time. So we
spoke with Tartaglione and what he told
us was that when Epstein came back from
this hearing where his bail was denied,
he turned around and asked him, "How do
you make a noose?"
>> Wow.
He is despondent. And what does
Epstein's cellmate do with this really
ominous question?
>> So after this, Tartaglione told us he
noticed Epstein
doing what seemed to be making
preparations for suicide attempts
>> Hm.
>> in the days after his bail was denied.
>> And what did those look like?
>> In one instance, he was tying a sheet to
a grade over the window in the corner of
their cell.
Another time, he said he woke up and saw
Epstein kind of standing strangely in
their cell
and looked under his mattress and found
a noose that he was hiding there.
>> Wow.
This behavior seems like a real
tell
about how miserable he is. But I'm
curious what at this point Epstein is
telling people outside of jail, to the
degree he has access to them, about his
state of mind.
>> It's interesting. One group we found in
our reporting that had a pretty clear
window
on Epstein while he was in jail was his
lawyers.
His lawyers were visiting him for hours
every day at the jail.
You know, he's now been in this very
isolated unit in the jail for a number
of days.
And you know, he says things to his
lawyers like, "I can't do this."
And he's often writing notes to himself
on a legal pad.
And in these conversations, in these
notes, he's conveying sort of fragments
of his state of mind, which really does
seem to be getting worse.
In the notes, he's talking about things
like just the noise in the unit where
he's being held. He writes, "No sleep,
no air, screams."
He's conveying that this is a really
miserable experience.
>> Mhm.
>> So, on July 23rd, several days after his
bail is denied,
around 1:30 in the morning, the guards
hear this banging coming from Epstein's
cell.
And they arrive and they see Tartaglione
is yelling at the door. And inside,
Epstein is on the floor motionless with
this orange noose around his neck.
>> This is
what we've come to understand to be his
first attempt at potentially dying by
suicide.
>> Right. And at the time, it's a little
unclear.
Going through the documentation of this
incident, we saw a lot of genuine
uncertainty on the part of the jail
staff
about what actually happened here, cuz
nobody saw it. And Tartaglione and
Epstein tell very different stories
about this incident.
>> [music]
>> From the beginning, Tartaglione says
that Epstein tried to kill himself.
Tartaglione was sleeping on the floor of
their cell when he feels something bump
[music] into his feet.
And he looks up and he sees Epstein
unconscious in the sitting position with
a noose around his neck
hanging from their bunk.
And cuts him down and yells for [music]
the guards.
Epstein's version of the story kind of
changes over time. [music]
Initially, he says that Tartaglione
attacked him.
>> Mhm.
>> And [music] later on, he starts saying
that he doesn't remember what happened,
that he got up to get a drink of water,
and next thing he [music] knew, he was
lying on the floor.
>> Mhm.
>> And later on he tells the story to one
of the lawyers who visits him that
Tartaglione was sort of playing [music]
some sort of prank on him, and it's all
a little unclear in the telling.
The jail officials never conclusively
determined what happened, but in the
meantime Epstein is put on suicide
watch.
>> Right, quite logically.
>> [music]
>> And throughout this whole time, the jail
psychologists,
>> [music]
>> wardens are trying to make sense of this
case.
And they end up kind of uncertain about
what happened and how much [music] risk
Epstein really seems to pose to himself.
But in our reporting, we found one piece
of evidence that might have changed
their assessment if they had had it at
the time.
>> Mhm.
>> But it was hidden from them.
>> And and what is that evidence and why
was it hidden?
>> So shortly after this incident with the
noose, Tartaglione is flipping through a
graphic novel that he has in their cell
when he finds this piece of paper.
And it looks very much like a suicide
note written by Epstein.
>> What does it say?
>> It says, "They investigated me for a
month, found nothing."
At another point he writes,
"It is a treat to be able to choose
one's time to say goodbye."
>> Mhm.
>> And then, "What you want me to do? Bust
out crying? No fun, not worth it."
>> What did you make of that note?
>> So there's a sentence, "It is a treat to
be able to choose one's time to say
goodbye," that seems like a pretty clear
reference to planning to kill himself.
>> Mhm.
>> And there's this other sentence here,
which is part of why we believe this
note is authentic, which is this kind of
strange line, "What you want me to do?
Bust out crying?"
>> Mhm.
>> This is a line from the Little Rascals,
the very early movie TV show characters.
And it's something that for whatever
reason Epstein had latched onto as a
kind of little personal catchphrase.
Like he threw it in emails with, you
know, very close friends and family
sometimes.
And it's something that Tartaglione
almost certainly would not have known
about. This is a really very specific
phrase that he seemed to only use with
people he was very close to.
>> Mhm. And why was this very revealing
letter, basically a suicide note, kept
hidden from jail officials?
>> So for complicated reasons, this note
ends up getting sealed in Tartaglione's
case. The only reason we know about it
is because we sued to get this judge in
the case to unseal this document.
>> Which the judge eventually did.
>> Wow.
>> But at the time
the jail authorities didn't know about
this note at all. And they were still
trying to figure out what exactly to
make of this attempt, who to believe.
And in the end the jail psychologist
decides that Epstein's risk of suicide
is only moderate.
>> Mhm.
>> And so he's sent back to the SHU, to the
special housing unit, where he was
before.
And this time he has a new cellmate, a
guy named Efrain Reyes,
who is a 50-year-old drug dealer from
the Bronx,
who is in the SHU because he's
cooperating in another case. So he's
there for his own safety also.
>> Mhm. And what does Reyes observe about
Epstein?
>> So Reyes becomes, in a way, one of the
most interesting witnesses to Epstein's
time in jail. He was interviewed by
investigators afterwards. He
unfortunately died of heart disease in
2020. We weren't able to interview him.
But there are handwritten notes in the
Epstein files of an interview with Reyes
by a federal prosecutor. And they are
one of the most interesting documents of
Epstein's time in jail.
Reyes seems to get to know him pretty
well. They spend a lot of time together
in the cell.
And you know, he struck the people who
interviewed him as this fairly genuine
person who seemed to want to kind of
help Epstein deal with jail.
>> Mhm.
>> They trade food. You know, Epstein
appreciates, clearly, some of his help
and you know, gets him a radio from the
commissary.
Reyes notices that the guards are
deferential to Epstein. You know, they
let him hang on to these extra sheets
that he's stashed in the cell, which was
not uncommon cuz the air conditioning,
it was very cold in the summer in this
jail. They're kind of building a
relationship in this
cell that feels really genuine,
actually.
And by the time that Epstein comes back
and is placed with Reyes in the cell,
you know, his reputation has sort of
preceded him. Not only do they know who
he is, but they also know that there's
been this thing that looked like a
suicide attempt.
>> Mhm.
>> And Reyes, from the beginning, is very
worried that Epstein is going to attempt
suicide again while he's living with
him.
And he actually brings this up directly
with Epstein
a number of times. He says, you know,
"Please don't do nothing while I'm in
here. I have a chance to go home soon.
I don't care what you did, that's all I
ask. If I can help you, let me know."
>> Mhm. Don't kill yourself on my watch.
That's bad for me.
>> Exactly.
So, Reyes notices things. This is
something that was pretty common it with
inmates of the MCC is that they would
fashion clotheslines out of bits of
bedsheets.
And Reyes has these lines that he's made
himself by, you know, tying strips of
bedsheet together.
And he notices that Epstein is looking
at and kind of fidgeting with this line
that he's got strung up in the cell.
And he kind of puts two and two together
and confronts him. He says, "Bro, we not
doing this." And he takes the line from
him and he flushes it down the toilet in
the cell.
And Epstein says something very
interesting to him. He says, "Don't
worry, I'm never going to cause you
trouble."
>> Mhm. He doesn't say, "Don't worry, I'm
never going to try to do that."
>> Exactly.
And you know, Reyes, another time, he
tries to convince Epstein that you can
survive in jail. He says, "You can live
in jail."
But Epstein is very pessimistic. He
tells him that, you know, because the
government is still mad about this plea
agreement that he made in his, you know,
last prosecution, that they're not going
to let him out again.
>> Mhm.
>> He says, "I know I'm never going to see
the street again."
And he says that life in prison is no
way to live.
>> Wow.
>> [music]
>> So, it's now early August.
Epstein has been in jail about a month.
>> Mhm.
>> And on August 9th, Reyes is moved to
another facility.
And he's worried enough about Epstein by
this point that he tells the jail
officials on his way out the door,
"Get him a good bunky. He's not good to
be alone."
>> Don't leave Jeffrey Epstein alone if I'm
not here with him.
>> But that's exactly what's about to
happen.
Jeffrey Epstein is going to be left
alone in the cell for the last night of
his life.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Charlie, tell us about Jeffrey Epstein's
last day in this jail. You just said
that he's suddenly alone despite his
last cellmate saying that would be a
very bad idea. Why?
>> In our reporting,
we found it's genuinely unclear why he
didn't get another cellmate. A number of
people flagged this issue.
But for whatever reason, by the end of
the day, he still doesn't have a
cellmate. He returns to his cell and
he's all alone. The only people watching
him at this point are the guards.
>> And how many guards are watching
Epstein? What's the
setup?
>> So, this is a jail that has for a very
long time had just a ton of chronic
problems. And one of them is real issues
of staffing. It's understaffed. It's
overcrowded with inmates.
And the staff who's working, because
it's understaffed, tend to be working
very long hours, which has this sort of
cascading effect. They're often very,
very tired,
sometimes calling in sick cuz they need
to catch up on sleep. People are being
subbed in at all sorts of jobs they
don't regularly do.
It's just kind of a recipe for disaster.
So much so that 6 months before all this
happened, a union official representing
the corrections officers at this jail
warned in a letter to the Bureau of
Prisons, quote, "Quite frankly, at this
point, we are one incident away from a
staff or inmate fatality." So, there are
two guards on duty in the SHU at this
time.
And they sit at this desk that you can
actually see from Epstein's cell.
And when Reyes was still in the cell,
they would watch these guards at night
and kind of note their behaviors and you
know, the fact that they were often
sleeping on the job, things like that.
So, Epstein actually knew a good bit, we
think, about the guards' behaviors and
their inattention at times.
>> Given all these problems at this jail,
what have you and our colleagues learned
about what these guards on duty this
night did or didn't do?
>> So, there was one guard in particular
who was on duty through this entire
period of time leading up to Epstein's
death, a woman named Tova Noel.
And Noel had already been working
basically the whole day when she was
forced to take another overtime shift
beginning at midnight.
And the result of this is that she's
sort of the one guard who's there
throughout this whole period of time
when Epstein dies.
And at the beginning of that time
period, she's working with another guard
who's sort of unaccounted for, might be
sleeping, it's a little unclear.
And she's doing what the guards are
supposed to do, which is these regular
rounds of all the cells in the SHU, just
checking to make sure everything's okay.
And then, she comes by Epstein's cell.
He asks her to plug in his CPAP machine
that he has because he has sleep apnea
and he needs this to sleep.
She plugs in the machine, continues on
her way. This is the last time anyone
acknowledges seeing Epstein alive.
>> Hm. It's a little after 10:00 at this
point. The night goes on.
Noel and the other guard are supposed to
make these rounds regularly. There's
actually a sign on the desk that says
specifically they need to be checking
every half hour on Epstein. This is the
one thing they're absolutely supposed to
be doing.
>> Hm. Somebody has said to them whatever
else you do, check on Epstein.
>> Right. And this is the thing that they
do not do the rest of the night.
We know this from the video camera
footage of this part of the jail.
They are sitting at the desk.
It seems possible they're sleeping,
although both guards have denied it.
But nobody is checking on the cells
overnight.
>> Mhm.
>> So because of that, what we came to
learn in our reporting was that the only
people who were really alert to what was
happening in Epstein's cell were the
other inmates on the hall with him.
>> Hm. And what do they observe?
>> So, we found an inmate who was at the
time housed in the cell right next to
Epstein's cell.
>> Hm.
>> And he told a very interesting story.
One thing about these cells is you can
actually hear a fair amount between the
cells.
And late that night, he hears this
ripping sound coming from Epstein's
cell.
>> Ripping sound.
>> It sounds like someone's ripping sheets
in there.
And he kind of connects the dots here
and you know, has clearly has some sense
of what's happening. And so he tries to
kind of distract Epstein. He calls out
and he asks him if he has any stamps.
Stamps are kind of a common currency in
in jail.
And Epstein tells him, "I didn't order
any stamps."
>> Basically buzz off.
>> Basically buzz off. And
that's the end of their interaction.
This inmate says he keeps hearing this
ripping sound for a while and then it
goes quiet.
>> And then what happens?
>> So from this point on, things are very
quiet on the shoe for the next 6 hours
or so.
>> [music]
>> And then at 6:30, the other guard on
duty, a man by the name of Michael
Thomas is delivering breakfast.
And he rolls the cart into the corridor
where Epstein's cell is.
And he sees Epstein, part of Epstein's
body motionless through this narrow
window in the cell.
>> [music]
>> And he calls out for him.
There's no movement in the cell.
He opens the door. And he sees Epstein
hanging by a noose.
>> Mhm.
>> [music]
>> So, Michael Thomas, this guard calls out
for the other guard, this woman Tova
Noel.
And Noel activates an alarm. Meanwhile,
Thomas rips Epstein down from where he's
hanging. He lays him out on the floor
and starts administering chest
compressions. And he shouts, "Breathe,
Epstein, breathe."
>> Mhm.
>> And then she hears him say, "We are
going to be in so much trouble."
And about an hour later, Epstein's been
taken to the hospital and declared dead.
>> Charlie, at the beginning of this
conversation, you said that all this
reporting was pointing to one
conclusion. And in listening to you talk
about what you all found, that
conclusion would seem to be not all that
ambiguously suicide.
>> That's right. In all of our reporting,
it was clear that the overwhelming
preponderance of circumstantial evidence
pointed to suicide. Epstein had been
talking about actively attempting
writing references to killing himself
for days before this happened. It's
reflected in the notes that he wrote in
jail. People who spent the most time
with him, his cellmates, perceived this.
And this was sort of the starting point
for the first people who investigated
this death after it happened. You know,
I think that pretty much immediately
after his body was found, there's these
questions about how did this happen?
>> Mhm. And a lot of them seem to kind of
operate on this assumption that that it
was unthinkable that somebody as
significant as Epstein would have been
allowed to kill themselves in this jail.
But the people who actually knew this
facility well, the inmates, and
certainly the federal prosecutors who
spent a lot of time dealing with people
being held there,
had a better sense of what kind of jail
this was, and that it was a place where
lapses on the part of the guards were
very common,
>> Mhm.
>> where a lot of things went wrong.
And it wasn't necessarily as
counterintuitive to them that somebody
would have been able to get away with
this there.
>> Interesting.
>> But as much as all of the evidence
points in this direction, there are some
very important gaps, which we should
talk about.
>> Okay, let's talk about them.
>> The first is the autopsy of Jeffrey
Epstein.
You know, the day after his body was
found, the city medical examiner did a
full autopsy.
>> Mhm.
>> And she concluded that he had died by
self-hanging. But there are a set of
credible questions about the marks on
his body, and whether they were
exclusively consistent with suicide, or
whether they could have been consistent
with homicide also. We put this to a
number of pathologists, and actually got
a lot of different opinions uh when they
were looking at these photos. But what
nearly all of them say is it's really
not possible to determine a manner of
death conclusively from looking at the
body alone. You would need this whole
other suite of information about the
circumstances the body was found, the
death scene, and that's the information
that we simply don't have because a lot
of it wasn't gathered at the time of his
death.
>> And why wasn't it gathered at the time
of his death?
>> Well, that brings us to the second gap,
which is these really pretty big holes
in the initial handling of the death
scene and some aspects of the first
investigations into the scene.
>> [snorts]
>> So, remember, Epstein is found in the
morning around 6:30 by one of these
guards.
>> Right, bringing breakfast.
>> Bringing him breakfast. And that guard
didn't actually tell investigators, or
really anybody I think except for maybe
his supervisors, what he saw until much,
much later. Two years later, actually,
is when he gives a real interview about
this to investigators. [clears throat]
And in that interview, he didn't really
have a lot of detail. He had some detail
about how the body was found when he got
there, but not very much. And by the
time anybody else makes it into the
cell, he's pulled down Epstein and he's
put him on the floor, and pretty soon
you have other guards, you have EMTs,
you have all sorts of people trampling
over this death scene to the point where
it's really been very badly contaminated
by the time the FBI shows up.
>> Mhm.
>> And for that reason, according to their
own records of this, the FBI agents did
not take DNA evidence from anything in
the scene.
>> Wow.
>> Um this is a little unusual. You know,
normal procedure would be to take DNA
evidence, but they didn't do that.
>> I mean, from everything you're saying,
what you'd expect to be a fairly
pristine investigatory scene
because it is occurring in a federally
controlled facility staffed by law
enforcement
turns
into, instead, a bit of a fiasco.
>> I would say it's not super unusual. You
know, a lot of people are operating
under the assumption that he might not
actually be dead at this moment, and
their first priority is to resuscitate
him if that's possible. So, it's not
crazy that the guards and the paramedics
are sort of trampling all over this
place. But that is what happened, and it
led to them making some real errors in
terms of cataloging the evidence in the
scene.
>> The most notable is probably that they
grabbed the wrong noose from his cell.
>> Huh.
>> So, there were a number of of different,
you know, nooses or things that looked
like nooses that Epstein had around him
in the cell. The cell was really a mess.
There were all these piles of linens,
and there were a number of these strips
of fabric kind of scattered around the
cell. The one that they grabbed was tied
in the shape of a noose, but
investigators later concluded was not
the one that he actually used.
>> Wow.
>> But the fact that they grabbed it, and
this was the one that was sort of seen
in the evidence, created a lot of
suspicions around this. Cuz if you look
at the pictures of his body, they really
clearly didn't match this noose that
we'd seen a picture of at the time.
>> This is just remarkable because at this
point, it's just one mistake on top of
another.
>> That's right. And on top of all that,
there's this huge problem, which is the
security camera system of the jail.
There were security cameras spread
throughout this unit where Epstein was
being held.
But, a number of days before his death,
there was a hardware failure, which led
to half of the cameras in this unit not
recording anything. They could be
monitored in real time,
but they were not recording any video.
And this meant that there were only
really two cameras recording
in the area outside of Epstein's
corridor that captured any of the events
that night.
>> In other words, there are things we will
never know because we will never look at
the cameras.
>> Right. And that's raised this question
of whether somebody could have gotten in
in this blank spot in the tape and made
their way to Epstein's cell and killed
him.
>> Right.
>> And you know, one piece of evidence that
people marshaled to show that that would
have been possible is this little
enigmatic fragment of video from one of
the two cameras that was actually
recording that night.
One of the two cameras, the one that
we've spent the most time looking at,
was trained on the common area of the
SHU, including the desk where the guards
were sitting. And it catches a little
sliver of the staircase leading up to
Epstein's cell.
Around 10:40 that night, after Tova Noel
did her one round,
we see this orange shape in the corner
of the frame that appears to be moving
up the staircase
to the door to Epstein's hallway of the
SHU.
>> Mhm.
>> And it's there for a few seconds, and
it's gone.
And yeah, this has fueled a lot of
speculation that maybe this is somebody
sneaking into the hallway to get to his
cell.
So, we spent a lot of time with our
colleagues from Visual Investigations
looking at all the evidence here. You
know, would it be theoretically possible
for somebody to sneak into Epstein's
cell
unnoticed, uncaptured by cameras that
night.
And what we found is that there was a
pathway by which somebody could have
gotten up to the cell that would not
have been caught on camera.
>> Mhm.
>> Or, you know, would have accounted for
this, you know, tiny sliver of movement.
Anybody getting into the shoe that night
though would have had to get through
several locked doors. One of them was
controlled remotely by a control center
of the jail. People who'd be watching
this door on camera.
The other is there were three doors that
this person would have had to get
through, all of which were opened only
with a physical key. That's a pretty
Herculean
task.
>> So, how getting there in the first
place, let alone getting there without
being detected by a camera?
>> Right. We're talking about, you know,
Mission Impossible levels of of
difficulty here. You know, this would
have had to involve a plot involving two
whole separate, you know, areas of the
jail.
A very detailed knowledge of the
security cameras and which cameras were
working and which cameras were not
working,
who was monitoring which cameras, who
had the keys, how to get those keys
while not being on camera. We're talking
about an extremely elaborate
choreography, and we found nothing in
our reporting to suggest that anything
of this nature actually happened.
>> Mhm.
>> I mean, so in the end, the simplest
explanation of what happened here,
which everyone struggled to accept for
quite some time,
that this powerful man who did terrible
things and got away with it for so long
enters prison and confinement and is
horrified by it
and decides he can't handle it and takes
his own life. That seems to be
not just the simplest explanation, but
the very likeliest.
>> Right. We came away thinking, you know,
was it theoretically possible there was
an alternate explanation? Maybe, but
there's simply no evidence that anything
else happened. Whereas, you have to
weigh that against, you know, this
mountain of evidence showing that he was
clearly intent on killing himself at the
time.
>> Mhm. Have you accepted the explanation
that he died by suicide?
>> [gasps]
>> I have. I think that, you know, at this
point it is the rational way to look at
what we know about this case and what we
are likely to know about this case.
I think there are a lot of unknowns that
are going to remain unknowns, but the
bottom line is that whatever reason
there is to think that other things
could have happened,
there's simply not the evidence
necessary to stand up a convincing
alternate explanation of how he died.
>> You know, it strikes me that when it
comes to Epstein's death,
people have been suspicious
about the government maybe for the wrong
reasons. And just stick with me for a
minute. The theory all along was that
somebody killed Epstein in that jail,
and the government wanted to hide it,
wanted to cover it up.
Your reporting doesn't support that
conclusion.
But what your reporting does support is
the conclusion that the government's
incompetence in running this jail at
lots of levels, from staffing to failing
to pick up all kinds of clues that
Epstein left left and right, that he was
suicidal,
to the number of contraband sheets in
his cell the night he dies, that that
allowed Epstein to kill himself, quite
likely. And that's the reason people
should be mad at the government because
its conduct in this jail, which it runs,
let Jeffrey Epstein kill himself and
evade justice. And the government had a
pretty simple job here, which was to
keep Jeffrey Epstein alive so that he
could go to trial and so that there
could be justice. And it completely
failed to do that.
>> I think that's right. I mean, the
government can do different things to
breed suspicion. It doesn't have to just
act
nefariously. It can act indifferently.
And I think in this case, just the
inattention to the management of this
jail
breeds anger and breeds suspicion.
And I think in the case of Epstein,
what's remarkable about his death is
that you can point to
all these different factors that enabled
him to kill himself ultimately.
And it's really hard to find any of
those that weren't an issue at this jail
long before Epstein even walked in the
door.
>> The indifference preceded him, and he
was not exempt from it, despite the fact
that he's arguably the most famous and
important prisoner in the system.
>> That's right. And one of the kind of
remarkable things about this whole case
is that in a weird way, Epstein's death
sort of shone a light on all these
really chronic failures of this
institution. You know, things that
people much less famous than Epstein had
been enduring for years before this in
some cases.
>> [music]
>> And in a perverse way, I mean, something
that Epstein's death did was really kind
of highlight some of these really
chronic issues in this jail that a less
high-profile inmate would not have
called nearly so much media attention
to.
And this jail actually was closed down
not long after this, in part because of
all these, you know, [music] chronic
problems there. I mean, the
>> MCC's no longer operational.
>> MCC's no longer operational. And there
was documented concern from the Bureau
of Prisons that people who were working
and staying in this jail were actually
at risk
kind of its crumbling infrastructure.
Just like very basic issues with [music]
this jail.
And one thing those issues have done now
in retrospect is really robbed us of
closure in this very important case.
[music]
And really ensured that questions about
this are going to persist, [music] no
matter how much we do to try to come up
with an answer what actually happened.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Well, Charlie,
thank you very much. We appreciate it.
>> Thanks for having me.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
>> Here's what else you need to know
[music] today.
On Wednesday, US officials released the
specific terms of the agreement signed
by the US and Iran,
>> [music]
>> which would reopen the Strait of Hormuz,
would lift restrictions on Iran's export
of oil, and outlines plans for a $300
billion fund for Iran's post-war [music]
reconstruction.
US officials, sensitive to criticism
that the deal overly rewards [music]
Iran,
stressed that the reconstruction fund
would not involve US funds.
>> So, the one thing I didn't want to see
is I didn't want to see
economic [music] catastrophe. If you
kept this going, that could have
happened.
>> In remarks from Europe, where he's
[music] attending the G7 summit, Trump
made clear that he was motivated to
reach the agreement in large part
because of the economic [music] fallout
from the war.
>> But all I know is every time we talked
about the possibility of peace, [music]
the stock market shot up like a rocket
ship. It never went down. They didn't
like it, the people.
>> [music]
>> Today's episode was produced by Austa
Chaturvedi, Jack Disseldorp, and Shannon
Lin.
It was [music] edited by Mark George,
contains music by Alicia Eubanks and
Sophia Landman.
Our theme music [music] is by Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Chris
Wood.
Special [music] thanks to Jan Ransom,
Steve Eder,
Michael Rothfeld, and Jessica [music]
Lustig.
>> [music]
>> That's it for The Daily.
I'm Michael Barbaro.
See you tomorrow.